# Monetary Stability

Despite weakening pressure on the Hong Kong dollar exchange rate, the Hong Kong dollar exchange and money markets continued to operate in an orderly manner with ample liquidity. The Linked Exchange Rate System has served as a strong anchor for Hong Kong’s monetary and financial stability and proved to be highly resilient against various shocks.

# OBJECTIVES

The overriding objective of Hong Kong’s monetary policy is currency stability. This is defined as a stable external exchange value of Hong Kong’s currency, in terms of its exchange rate in the foreign-exchange market against the US dollar, within a band of HK$7.75–7.85 to US$1. The structure of the monetary system is characterised by Currency Board arrangements, requiring the Monetary Base to be at least 100% backed by US dollar reserves held in the Exchange Fund, and changes in the Monetary Base to be 100% matched by corresponding changes in US dollar reserves.

The Monetary Base (Table 1) comprises:
- Certificates of Indebtedness, which provide full backing to the banknotes issued by the three noteissuing banks
- Government-issued notes and coins in circulation
- the Aggregate Balance, which is the sum of the clearing account balances of banks kept with the HKMA
- Exchange Fund Bills and Notes (EFBNs) issued by the HKMA on behalf of the Government.

The stability of the Hong Kong dollar exchange rate is maintained through an automatic interest rate adjustment mechanism and the HKMA’s firm commitment to honour the Convertibility Undertakings (CUs). When the demand for Hong Kong dollars is greater than the supply and the market exchange rate strengthens to the strong-side CU of HK$7.75 to one US dollar, the HKMA stands ready to sell Hong Kong dollars to banks for US dollars. The Aggregate Balance will then expand to push down Hong Kong dollar interest rates, creating monetary conditions that move the Hong Kong dollar away from the strong-side limit to within the Convertibility Zone of 7.75 to 7.85. Conversely, if the supply of Hong Kong dollars is greater than the demand and the market exchange rate weakens to the weak-side CU of HK$7.85 to one US dollar, the HKMA will buy Hong Kong dollars from banks. The Aggregate Balance will then contract to drive Hong Kong dollar interest rates up, pushing the Hong Kong dollar away from the weak-side limit to stay within the Convertibility Zone.

# REVIEW OF 2017

# Exchange rate stability

The Hong Kong dollar exchange rate generally saw weakening pressure in 2017 (Chart 1). Driven mainly by interest carry trade activities amid widened negative spreads between the Hong Kong dollar and US dollar interest rates, the Hong Kong dollar eased gradually against the US dollar, from 7.7566 on 3 January to the year-low of 7.8265 on 22 August. The Hong Kong dollar exchange rate gained some strength between late September and early November, underpinned by a tightening of Hong Kong dollar liquidity due to initial public offering (IPO)-related funding demand, and traded steadily within a narrow range of 7.80–7.81. Weakening pressures on the Hong Kong dollar were seen again towards the end of the year, partly reflecting slightly improved Hong Kong dollar liquidity conditions as well as increased year-end commercial demand for the US dollar. Overall, the Hong Kong dollar exchange market functioned normally throughout 2017.

As the CUs were not triggered, the total of the Aggregate Balance and outstanding EFBNs remained virtually unchanged at around HK$1,225.3 billion in 2017 (Chart 2). During the year, the HKMA issued a total of HK$80 billion additional Exchange Fund Bills to meet banks’ increased demand for liquidity management. This led to a contraction of the Aggregate Balance to HK$179.8 billion at the end of 2017. The issuance of additional Exchange Fund Bills was consistent with Currency Board principles, as it only represented a change in the composition of the Monetary Base, with a shift from the Aggregate Balance to the outstanding EFBNs. The Monetary Base remained fully backed by foreign exchange reserves.

# Money market

The Hong Kong dollar interbank interest rates stayed soft in the first eight months of 2017 before facing more upward pressure towards the end of the year (Chart 3). Despite concerns about the US Federal Reserve’s interest rate hikes and balance sheet normalisation, the Hong Kong dollar interbank rates generally remained soft for the first eight months. As such, the negative spreads between the Hong Kong dollar and US dollar interest rates widened between January and August. From September onward, the shortdated Hong Kong dollar interbank rates witnessed large pick-ups, driven mainly by IPO-related and year-end funding demand. Correspondingly, the negative spreads between the Hong Kong dollar and US dollar interest rates narrowed in the short-dated segment. Overall, the short-dated interbank rates traded mostly below the Base Rate in 2017.

The Base Rate was adjusted upwards on 16 March, 15 June and 14 December, by a total of 75 basis points from 1.00% to 1.75%, as the target range for the US federal funds rate moved upward three times by a total of 75 basis points from 0.50–0.75% to 1.25–1.50% during the year. The adjustment of the Base Rate was in accordance with the revised formula announced on 26 March 2009, in which the Base Rate is set at either 50 basis points above the lower bound of the prevailing target range for the US federal funds rate or the average of the five-day moving averages of the overnight and one-month Hong Kong Interbank Offered Rates (HIBORs), whichever is the higher.

Roughly tracking the movements of the Hong Kong dollar-US dollar interest rate spreads, the discounts of the Hong Kong dollar forward points widened gradually during the first three quarters, with the 12-month Hong Kong dollar forward points reaching about -615 pips in midSeptember (Chart 4). In the fourth quarter, the discounts of the Hong Kong dollar forward points narrowed slightly along with the narrowing of the negative spreads between the Hong Kong dollar and US dollar interest rates. Overall, Hong Kong’s money market continued to operate in an orderly manner and interbank liquidity remained ample. Discount Window borrowing increased from HK$5.3 billion in 2016 to HK$10.3 billion in 2017.

# The Linked Exchange Rate System

Since its establishment in 1983, the Linked Exchange Rate System (LERS) has served as a strong anchor for Hong Kong’s monetary and financial stability, and proved to be highly resilient in a series of regional and global financial crises. The Government has reasserted its full commitment to the LERS and the credibility of its commitment was further reinforced by the stability in the foreign exchange and money markets. There is also continued strong public confidence in the Hong Kong dollar as a means of payment and a storage of value. In its 2017 Article IV consultation with Hong Kong, the International Monetary Fund reaffirmed its support for the LERS, commenting that the LERS remained the best exchange rate arrangement for Hong Kong. Combined with robust financial supervision and regulation, prudent fiscal management, and flexible markets, the LERS has worked well to help Hong Kong navigate successfully through both external and domestic challenges.

International Monetary Fund: “The Linked Exchange Rate System remains the best arrangement for Hong Kong.”

A sound banking system is crucial to the normal functioning of the LERS. During 2017, the HKMA continued to monitor closely banks’ management of credit, liquidity and interest rate risks and stress-test results, and stepped up its supervisory efforts on corporate, property-related and mainland-related lending to bolster the resilience of the banking sector. As the US Federal Reserve continues to normalise its monetary policy, the Hong Kong dollar interest rates will gradually normalise as well. The HKMA reiterated that, under the design of the LERS, the outflow of capital, the weakening of the Hong Kong dollar exchange rate, the triggering of the weak-side CU and the reduction of the Monetary Base are part of the necessary process of the normalisation of Hong Kong dollar interest rates. The HKMA also reminded the public to manage their risks prudently and be well prepared for potential financial turbulence.

To improve the transparency of the Currency Board Account, a specific portion of Exchange Fund assets has been allocated to back the Monetary Base since October 1998. The Backing Ratio, defined as the Backing Assets divided by the Monetary Base, moved within a range of 106.7–108.2% during 2017, without touching the Upper or Lower Trigger Level. The ratio closed at 108.1% on 31 December (Chart 5). Under the LERS, while specific Exchange Fund assets have been designated for the Backing Portfolio, all Exchange Fund assets are available to support the Hong Kong dollar exchange rate. In the event of abrupt shocks, the sizeable amount of financial resources of the Exchange Fund will provide a powerful backstop in protecting Hong Kong’s monetary and financial stability.

# Other activities

The Currency Board Sub-Committee (CBC) of the Exchange Fund Advisory Committee monitors and reviews issues relevant to the monetary and financial stability of Hong Kong. In 2017, the CBC considered various issues, including the drivers of short-run dynamics in Hong Kong’s housing prices, the determinants of HIBOR-London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) spreads, the effect of property valuation changes on corporate borrowing in Mainland China, and the effect of mortgage debt service burden on private consumption in Hong Kong. Records of the CBC’s discussions on these issues and the reports on Currency Board operations submitted to the CBC are published on the HKMA website.

The Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research (HKIMR) continued to sponsor research in the fields of monetary policy, banking and finance. Over the past three years, the HKIMR has been re-orienting its activities towards higher policy relevance. This is reflected, in particular, in its conference activities and visiting fellowship programmes. The HKIMR has been collaborating with major central banks and policy institutions to jointly organise more policyfocused conferences. Meanwhile, a thematic research fellowship programme introduced in 2016 has been supporting more research projects related to policy issues that are of importance to the HKMA.

In 2017, the HKIMR hosted 18 research fellows and published 29 working papers. It also organised four international conferences and workshops during the year:
- The Eighth Annual International Conference on the Chinese Economy, titled “China’s Economic Rebalancing: Where is it Heading?”, was held in January in Hong Kong. The conference provided a forum for academics, policy makers and business economists to discuss important analytical and policy issues related to the Mainland economy. 11 highquality research papers were presented, covering a wide variety of issues including Mainland’s economic rebalancing, structural reform and international spillovers, issues on the renminbi exchange rate, and Mainland’s monetary policy framework and transmission.
- The 15th HKIMR Summer Workshop was held in July. The workshop was intended to provide an opportunity for staff members of the HKIMR and the HKMA to present their research papers, and to enhance interaction between research staff and visiting fellows.
- A joint conference organised by the HKMA and the Bank for International Settlements, titled “The Price, Real and Financial Effects of Exchange Rates”, was held in August. The conference provided a platform for in-depth and insightful discussion. A wide range of important topics were covered, including the exchange rate system, the pricing system of international trade, risk taking in the accumulation of foreign currency reserves, and foreign exchange market behaviour.
- A conference jointly sponsored by the HKMA, the US Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta on “Unconventional Monetary Policy: Lessons Learned” was held in October. The conference reviewed lessons learned from the unconventional monetary policies (UMP) of major central banks over the past ten years. The topics included monetary policy in a low interest rate environment, UMP and its spillovers to emerging economies, UMP and bank lending, and UMP and its effects on the real economy and financial stability.
