# International Financial Centre

The global economic and financial environment was fraught with challenges in 2015, calling for closer international collaboration and communication to maintain stability. During the year, the HKMA continued to actively participate in international and regional forums while sparing no effort in raising Hong Kong’s competitiveness as an international financial centre, including enhancing our financial infrastructure, optimising the regulatory and tax regime, and capitalising on the internationalisation of the renminbi to further develop offshore renminbi business. Hong Kong’s strong economic fundamentals and robust fiscal performance continued to be recognised by credit rating agencies with Standard & Poor’s maintaining its top-rated AAA rating for Hong Kong.

# OVERVIEW

The HKMA actively contributes to international discussions on issues of significance to global and regional financial stability. In July, it assumed co-chairmanship of the Financial Stability Board Regional Consultative Group for Asia (FSB RCG(A)) for a two-year period. The group’s aim is to promote interaction between FSB members and nonmembers on policy initiatives, encourage implementation of financial reforms and facilitate the exchange of views on financial stability issues. The HKMA continued to work closely with the ASEAN+3 authorities to strengthen the operations of the ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic Research Office (AMRO) — which has been upgraded to an international organisation — to monitor and analyse regional economies and support decision-making of the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralisation (CMIM).

During the year, Hong Kong’s offshore renminbi pool and bond issuance experienced some contraction due to a number of market factors. However the market continued to function orderly, and renminbi trade settlement, bank lending and foreign exchange turnover maintained steady growth. In addition, the growing renminbi business conducted in and through Hong Kong contributed to the recognition of the renminbi by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) as a freely usable currency. The iMF’s decision to include it in the Special Drawing Right (SDR) currency basket will add impetus to the internationalisation of the renminbi as well as the further development of the offshore market in Hong Kong.

The safe and efficient operation of Hong Kong's financial infrastructure and its continued development play a significant role in reinforcing the competitive edge of Hong Kong as an international financial centre and the global offshore renminbi business hub. The turnover of the renminbi payment system in Hong Kong hit new highs in 2015, while the trade repository for over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives continued to support entities to report their OTC derivatives transactions as required under the new OTC derivatives market regulatory regime, which was introduced in July.

Hong Kong's financial infrastructure was further enhanced by the HKMA in 2015 with new components and services, including the successful launch of the e-Cheque service in December, which means that over 150 banks are now capable of receiving and processing e-Cheques from their customers through the Internet and mobile channels. The electronic bill presentment and payment (EBPP) service, which was launched in 2013, continued to see growth in merchant participation in 2015. In July, the Central Moneymarkets Unit (CMu) launched a service under its Fund Order Routing Service to support the implementation of the Mainland - Hong Kong Mutual Recognition of Funds (MRF). And, the regulatory framework for retail payment products and services was improved with the commencement in November of the Payment Systems and Stored Value Facilities Ordinance (PSSVFO). Under the PSSVFO, the HKMA is empowered to implement a mandatory licensing regime for multi-purpose stored value facilities and perform relevant supervision and enforcement functions, as well as designating important retail payment systems to ensure their safe and efficient operation under prudential regulation.

# International Financial Centre

# REVIEW OF 2015

# International and regional co-operation

With increased connections among global financial markets, the HKMA proactively fosters co-operation with other jurisdictions in promoting sustainable economic growth and financial system stability through international and regional forums including the FSB, the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC). The HKMA also continues to implement global financial regulatory reforms, including the recommendations of the G20, to help strengthen the resilience of the global financial system.

The HKMA became a co-chair of the FSB RCG(A) in July and hosted its ninth meeting in Hong Kong in October. The RCG(A) serves as an important platform for FSB members and non-FSB members to communicate and co-operate on financial stability issues. Senior representatives from finance ministries, central banks and financial regulators of 16 Asian jurisdictions attended the meeting to discuss risks facing the region, the implications of increasing asset management activities, misconduct risk and experience with deposit insurance schemes. The HKMA also co-chaired a workshop on macroprudential policies in Hong Kong in August. The workshop was organised by the Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS), and attended by representatives from 18 central banks from around the world. Participants shared their experiences in macroprudential policies, focusing on the calibration and evaluation of tools, their interaction with monetary policy, and possible spillover effects. The HKMA also co-hosted a conference with the Bank of England and the IMF, featuring discussions on the challenges that central banks and other policymakers face in choosing the optimal mix of monetary, macroprudential and microprudential policies. The conference was attended by over a hundred participants, including representatives from academia, central banks and international financial institutions.

# Promoting monetary and financial stability in Asia

The HKMA maintained its commitment to regional cooperative initiatives to promote financial stability in Asia and to harness the region's collective voice in international financial affairs. As a co-ordinator of the macro-surveillance work for the Monetary and Financial Stability Committee established under the Executives' Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Banks (EMEAP), the HKMA continued to prepare the Committee’s half-yearly Macro-Monitoring Report to assess the region’s risks and vulnerabilities and the policy implications. As Chair of the EMEAP Working Group on Payment and Settlement Systems, the HKMA worked closely with the Deputy Chair to co-ordinate the Group’s effort in sharing experiences and exchanging information on risk management, oversight, standards and best practices, and developments in domestic and cross-border payment and settlement systems. It also led the Working Group’s sub-group on cross-border co-operation and development. The HKMA hosted meetings of the EMEAP/BIS Forum on Foreign Exchange Markets and the EMEAP Working Group on Financial Markets (WGFM) in Hong Kong in June. Attended by representatives from 17 authorities from the region and major economies, the meetings reviewed the latest developments in financial markets and financial regulatory reforms.

Following the signing of the AMRO Agreement by Hong Kong and the ASEAN+3 authorities last year, AMRO was upgraded to an international organisation in February 2016 to support its pivotal role under the enhanced CMIM.

# Hong Kong’s credit ratings

The HKMA continued to maintain close dialogue with international credit rating agencies to present a balanced assessment of Hong Kong's economic performance and fiscal strength. These efforts contributed to the affirmation of Hong Kong's credit ratings by all major credit rating agencies in 2015. Standard & Poor's affirmed its highest AAA rating for Hong Kong, reflecting the agency’s recognition of Hong Kong’s above-average growth prospects for a high-income economy, sizable fiscal reserves, consistently healthy fiscal performance and strong net external asset position. Moody’s Investors Service and Fitch Ratings also maintained Hong Kong’s ratings at Aa1 and AA+ respectively, just one notch below triple-A.

# Development of Hong Kong as the offshore renminbi business centre

In 2015, market factors had an impact on Hong Kong's renminbi pool. At the end of the year, outstanding renminbi customer deposits and certificates of deposit stood at RMB 1,010 billion, as compared with RMB 1,158 billion a year ago (Chart 1). Offshore renminbi bond issuance moderated amid declining interest rates in the onshore market. As a result, issuance of renminbi bonds in Hong Kong dropped to RMB 75 billion. On the other hand, renminbi trade settlement transactions handled by banks in Hong Kong expanded by 9% to RMB 6,833 billion. The outstanding amount of renminbi bank loans also increased by 58% year-on-year to RMB 297 billion (Chart 2). Average daily turnover in the renminbi Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system increased to RMB 947 billion, up 29% from 2014. At the same time, the offshore renminbi foreign exchange market saw further growth in Hong Kong, with survey results indicating a daily turnover of some US$ 93 billion equivalent at the end of April 2015, an increase of 88% from April 2013 when the last BIS Triennial Survey was conducted. Hong Kong remained the largest offshore renminbi business hub with a market of considerable depth and breadth. Another significant development reinforcing this position was the implementation of the MRF initiative in July, which has expanded Hong Kong’s renminbi product offering.

The HKMA's policy initiative to expand channels for crossborder renminbi fund flows and its joint efforts with the industry to enhance Hong Kong's renminbi financial platform continued to bear fruit. In June, the People's Bank of China (PBoC) announced that offshore renminbi business clearing banks and participating banks would be allowed to conduct repo transactions in the onshore interbank bond market and remit proceeds offshore, to facilitate renminbi liquidity management by banks in the offshore market. In September, the PBoC relaxed the rules on cross-border renminbi cash pooling, enabling more multinational corporations to conduct intra-group cash transfers under streamlined arrangements. The Mainland authorities also granted foreign central banks, international financial institutions and sovereign wealth funds wider access to the onshore interbank bond market in July. They further opened up the Mainland’s foreign exchange market to these institutions in September.

On 30 november, the IMF announced its decision to include the renminbi in the SDR currency basket with effect from 1 October 2016. The decision affirms the renminbi’s status as a freely usable currency, and further promotes confidence in the use of the renminbi for global transactions. As an international financial centre and the global offshore renminbi business hub, Hong Kong will benefit from new business opportunities arising from the further internationalisation of the renminbi and the Mainland’s enhanced connection with the global economic and financial systems.

Hong Kong continued to reinforce its collaboration on renminbi business with other jurisdictions throughout the year. The HKMA co-hosted the third RMB Trade and Investment Dialogue with Australia and the fifth RMB Business Forum with London, and worked with Malaysia and Thailand for the second time in facilitating private sector discussions on renminbi business. Through these initiatives, banks in Hong Kong strengthened their renminbi business flows and linkages with other markets, which will bring more renminbi business to Hong Kong. The HKMA also stepped up its marketing efforts to promote the wider use of renminbi in trade, investment and financing among corporations and institutions through participation in industry events in Hong Kong and in overseas markets including Canada, Japan and Africa.

Deputy Chief Executive of the HKMA, Mr Eddie Yue, speaks at a seminar during the fifth meeting of Hong Kong–London RMB Forum on 11 December 2015.

# CEPA

A new agreement to achieve basic liberalisation of trade in services between Mainland China and Hong Kong was signed in November under the framework of the Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement (CEPA). The agreement extends most of the pilot liberalisation measures introduced in Guangdong in 2014 nationwide. By according national treatment, in principle, to Hong Kong banks, the new agreement is expected to provide these banks with more policy certainty and greater flexibility when conducting business in Mainland China.

# Training

The HKMA continued to provide training programmes for officials from the PBoC, the State Administration of Foreign Exchange and the China Banking Regulatory Commission. In addition to programmes dealing with central banking and general risk management, topics included consumer protection, credit reference, monetary and collateral management, financial soundness indicators analysis, and systemic risk monitoring. Ad hoc training sessions were also conducted for delegations from overseas banking and law enforcement agencies.

# Government Bond Programme

During the year, the HKMA arranged eight tenders of institutional government bonds amounting to HK$ 20.4 billion. By the end of 2015, the total amount of outstanding institutional bonds was HK$ 68.9 billion.
