# Resilience in the face of adversity

Reverberations from slowing global economic growth amid a “high for longer” interest rate environment and intensifying geopolitical tensions — not just stemming from the RussiaUkraine war and China-US tensions but also the outbreak of conflict in the Middle East — were the key themes for the financial markets in 2023. The March banking turmoil in the US and Europe, the most significant system-wide banking stress since the 2008 Global Financial Crisis, weighed further on market sentiment. Major economies grappled with the harsh realities of tightened monetary conditions and greater uncertainty over the inflationary path and interest rate outlook. Adding to the uncertainty was the pace of Mainland China’s economic recovery, which was slower than general market expectations.

With volatility and unpredictability becoming the “new normal” in financial markets, Hong Kong has again demonstrated its well-known ability to adapt, showing remarkable resilience. Since the city’s full-fledged post-COVID reopening last year, much work has been done to attract people back to our dynamic city and reconnect them with Hong Kong. The HKMA has contributed by hosting a series of large-scale international events such as the Global Financial Leaders’ Investment Summit and conferences with the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), which showcased our vibrant city and helped send the message worldwide that Hong Kong, as a major international financial centre (IFC), is open for business and remains the centre of action and innovation. There are clear signs of gradual recovery, driven by an encouraging revival of inbound tourism and improved private consumption, also supported by a resilient labour market and the various support measures rolled out by the Government. For 2023 as a whole, Hong Kong’s gross domestic product growth bounced back to 3.2% from negative territory in 2022.

The HKMA entered its fourth decade in 2023. The past 30 years have seen the dynamics of the economy and the financial markets change drastically, with technology driving advances beyond anyone’s wildest imagination. The invaluable experience and wisdom gained over the past three decades have enabled us to face the future with confidence. Despite macroeconomic headwinds and an uncertain external environment, the HKMA will continue to uphold its mandate of safeguarding monetary and banking stability in Hong Kong, and will actively pursue developmental opportunities to anchor that stability and cement the city’s status as a leading IFC.

Former and current Financial Secretaries of the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region and Chief Executives of HKMA at a gathering to celebrate the HKMA’s 30th anniversary: (from left) Mr Joseph Yam, Mr Henry Tang, Mr Donald Tsang, Mr Paul Chan, Mr Eddie Yue, Mr Antony Leung, Mr John Tsang, and Mr Norman Chan

# LERS — Weathering the storms

Last year marked the 40th anniversary of the Linked Exchange Rate System (LERS), a staunch pillar supporting Hong Kong’s strong and stable monetary and financial systems. Four decades of transparent and effective operation have nurtured confidence in the LERS and its credibility in the market. Throughout the year, the Hong Kong dollar stayed within the Convertibility Zone and the Hong Kong dollar market operated smoothly, reflecting the strong market confidence in the LERS, a confidence also shared and expressed by the International Monetary Fund and global market players.

Behind this confidence lie the HKMA’s proactive efforts in public and market engagements, along with effective surveillance. We spared no effort during the year in communicating with key stakeholders to foster a clear understanding of the functioning of the LERS, which is all the more important in times of volatility, be it stemming from economic stress or political uncertainties. We also strengthened surveillance of our monetary system, leveraging the use of datasets from the trade repository and expanded granular data from banks, as well as advanced data analytics and artificial intelligence, to enhance our capability, enabling more timely and comprehensive analysis of financial stability and macro-prudential surveillance.

# Banking system — A major source of stability

Despite a multitude of challenges including the high-interestrate environment, persistent geopolitical tensions and a challenging credit landscape, Hong Kong’s banking system remained stable throughout the year, underpinned by strong capital and liquidity buffers.

As at the end of 2023, the consolidated total capital ratio of local banks stood at 21.1%, well above the international minimum requirement of 8%. The Liquidity Coverage Ratio of large banks edged up to 178.6% as of the fourth quarter of 2023, likewise well above the statutory minimum requirement of 100%. While the classified loan ratio increased slightly from 1.40% at the end of 2022 to 1.56% at the end of 2023, it remained below the long-term historical average of 2.0%. The increase was mainly driven by exposures to Mainland privately-owned enterprise (POE) property developers; but such exposure levels were generally well-contained as a result of banks’ prudent credit risk management over the years, and the overall asset quality of the banking sector remained sound.

What caught most market players by surprise in 2023 was unquestionably the banking turmoil in the US spilling over to Europe, which created a level of system-wide banking stress unseen since the 2008 Global Financial Crisis. The HKMA remained on high alert as the situation unfolded and took a number of precautionary actions to limit any potential adverse spillover effects on confidence in the local banking and financial systems. This, coupled with the strong capital and liquidity buffers maintained by banks in Hong Kong, meant that our banking sector was largely unaffected by the turmoil, remaining resilient even as the global financial markets were roiled. In the aftermath of this episode, the HKMA conducted a comprehensive internal review with a view to drawing out lessons for the local banking sector and strengthening the HKMA’s supervisory effectiveness and agility to handle a banking crisis should one occur.

While prudent credit risk management is important, we have always reiterated our supervisory expectation for banks to be mindful of the need to support the real economy. As the orderly exit from the banking sector’s Pre-approved Principal Payment Holiday Scheme commenced in July 2023 with the economic effects of COVID-19 receding, the HKMA worked closely with banks to ensure a gradual and smooth transition to normal loan repayment with flexibility for those borrowers who continued to be under pressure. Earlier this year, recognising that some small and medium-sized enterprises are still facing challenges in their operations despite the end of the pandemic, nine new measures were rolled out to further assist them in obtaining financing from banks.

Having reviewed the risks associated with the local property market in the context of banks’ property lending, the HKMA announced in July 2023 the first relaxation of the countercyclical macroprudential measures for residential properties since their introduction in 2009. This relaxation increased the loan-to-value ratio cap for most residential mortgage loans as well as for financing for property development and investment. It was later followed by suspension of the interest rate stress testing requirement in early 2024.

The HKMA’s supervision of financial institutions has been moving with the times. With recent years having seen a sharp global increase in fraud cases, we have considerably stepped up our efforts to counter new fraud tactics by introducing a holistic set of measures to protect bank customers. These include enhancing information sharing between banks and with law enforcement agencies; strengthening the monitoring of suspicious transactions (including implementation of real-time fraud monitoring and tightened payment card authentication); empowering customers to have more controls on their payment cards; and educating customers and raising public awareness of frauds with the launch of the Anti-Scam Consumer Protection Charter, as well as a pre-transaction alert mechanism which warns users if a higher-risk Faster Payment System (FPS) transaction is spotted.

In light of a proliferation of innovative and digital banking products and services, the HKMA has worked with the banking industry to step up consumer and investor protection more broadly and enhance the banks’ operational and cyber resilience, as well as their collective defences against systemic cyber events. At the same time, all major banks have considerably strengthened their capabilities to respond to, and recover from, destructive ransomware attacks. The HKMA together with the industry has also pursued various consumer data infrastructure projects, such as the “Credit Data Smart” pilot programme to enhance consumer credit reference services, and taken forward a cross-boundary credit reference initiative to facilitate crossboundary financing activities by corporates.

Fintech and digitalisation can bring about enormous opportunities when the risk is properly managed. Leveraging earlier success in facilitating the uptake of Regtech, the HKMA, with the support of the Securities and Futures Commission (SFC) and the Insurance Authority, published a new Fintech Promotion Roadmap in August 2023 to promote further development of fintech by financial institutions in five focus areas — Wealthtech, Insurtech, Greentech, artificial intelligence and distributed ledger technology. We anticipate local regulators continuing to collaborate and work closely together with their industry sectors in the coming years in order for the Hong Kong financial industry as a whole to keep abreast and reap the benefits of dynamic fintech development.

# Hong Kong as an IFC — The centre of action and innovation

In 2023, we fully emerged from the pandemic. Hong Kong was not only back in business but its position as one of the world’s leading IFCs was further underscored by the return of global investors and our strengthened global network. Domestically, we took the opportunity of the 30th anniversary of the HKMA’s establishment to host a series of large-scale, international events with top-level participation from the global financial and banking community to demonstrate Hong Kong’s vibrancy and to send a clear message that Hong Kong as an IFC remained relevant and indispensable to global investors and financial institutions seeking growth and innovation. Of particular note was the return of the Global Financial Leaders’ Investment Summit, held in November, which attracted to our city more than 350 international and regional leaders from some 160 global financial institutions. Other high-powered events hosted in Hong Kong included a meeting of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (Basel Committee) and two HKMA-BIS Conferences which were among the largest gatherings of central bank governors and banking supervisors of the year. These events attest to the global financial sector’s commitment to and confidence in Hong Kong.

Externally, 2023 was also a year in which Hong Kong proactively reached out to strengthen its connections with traditional markets including the US and Europe, as well as new destinations such as those in the Middle East. We met with peer regulators and top management of global financial institutions in these markets to both apprise and update them on the opportunities in Hong Kong and the Mainland, while seeking out new collaboration opportunities for Hong Kong.

To complement these engagement efforts, we actively contributed to the work of international and regional forums by taking up certain leadership roles. During the year, I accepted invitations to chair the BIS Meeting of Governors from Major Emerging Market Economies and to co-chair the Financial Stability Board (FSB)’s Regional Consultative Group for Asia. My colleagues are also chairing or co-chairing a number of other important groupings under the Basel Committee, the Financial Action Task Force, and the Executives’ Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Banks, to name a few. The HKMA’s leadership at many regional and international forums is a recognition of Hong Kong’s expertise and contribution to international central banking and regulatory efforts in the pursuit of global monetary and financial stability, as well as Hong Kong’s importance as an IFC.

To build on the above accomplishments, we must position ourselves as a forward-looking IFC, staying ahead of the curve to ensure our ongoing competitiveness. We have identified three long-term trends in the coming years that will shape our future: namely the continued opening-up of the Mainland, the development of green and sustainable finance and the deployment of fintech. We will continue to support the development of our financial markets to capture the opportunities from these long-term trends while positioning our financial platform to provide leading services to attract more businesses to Hong Kong. For details of our work on green and sustainable finance, readers may refer to our Sustainability Report 2023.
