# International Financial Centre

During 2022, the HKMA achieved notable progress in strengthening Hong Kong’s status as a globally competitive international financial centre through a multi-pronged approach.

The success of the Global Financial Leaders’ Investment Summit, which welcomed over 200 international and regional leaders from around 120 global financial institutions, had reinforced Hong Kong’s status as an international financial centre and created positive ripple effects.

On reinforcing Hong Kong’s position as a global hub for offshore renminbi business, significant progress was made in a number of areas. These included enhancements to the existing currency swap agreement between the HKMA and the People’s Bank of China and subsequent refinements to the HKMA’s Renminbi Liquidity Facility, thereby ensuring sufficient renminbi liquidity which is conducive to further offshore renminbi products and market developments; joint announcement with the People’s Bank of China and the Securities and Futures Commission on the implementation of Swap Connect, joint efforts with the Securities and Futures Commission and Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing Limited for the introduction of a Dual Counter Market Making regime to facilitate the trading of renminbi-denominated stocks in Hong Kong, and the HKMA’s multi-year programme to further enhance our financial market infrastructure and develop the Central Moneymarkets Unit into a major international central securities depository in Asia. Thanks to ample renminbi liquidity, world-class market infrastructure and the Mainland-Hong Kong Connect schemes, Hong Kong is the favoured platform for Mainland funds to tap into global markets and for international investors to access the fast-growing Mainland markets.

The HKMA also made good progress towards strengthening the competitiveness of Hong Kong’s financial platform, in areas including bond issuance, asset and wealth management, corporate treasury centres, and green and sustainable finance. To promote Hong Kong’s financial services, the HKMA stepped up market outreach to overseas and Mainland stakeholders to keep them informed about the resilience of Hong Kong’s financial system and the prospects it presents.

Meanwhile, the HKMA continued to implement the “Fintech 2025” strategy to promote the wide adoption of fintech by the financial sector and bolster Hong Kong’s position as a fintech hub more broadly. The Faster Payment System continued to see steady growth, with the number of registrations exceeding ten million in March and the average daily turnover exceeding one million transactions in September.

As an active member in international and regional central banking and regulatory forums, the HKMA continued to contribute to global efforts in maintaining financial stability and promoting financial market developments.

# Overview

The HKMA continued its proactive efforts in strengthening Hong Kong’s competitiveness as an international financial centre. In November, the HKMA organised the Global Financial Leaders’ Investment Summit, which was an initiative announced by the Financial Secretary in his 2022–23 Budget. The three-day event featured prominent financial leaders sharing unique perspectives on navigating through uncertainties while capturing opportunities. The overwhelming responses with over 200 participants from around 120 international financial institutions demonstrated the global financial sector’s commitment to Hong Kong.

Hong Kong’s position as an offshore renminbi business hub further consolidated, with offshore renminbi businesses registering robust growth during the year. Hong Kong plays an indispensable role in facilitating capital flows between the Mainland and international financial markets, with the Mainland–Hong Kong Connect schemes being widely accepted as the channels of choice for international investors to access onshore capital markets and for Mainland investors to allocate to offshore assets. In 2022, trading under Northbound Bond Connect accounted for 61% of foreign turnover in the China Interbank Bond Market. Southbound Bond Connect and the Cross-boundary Wealth Management Connect (Cross-boundary WMC) have been operating smoothly since launch in 2021. The announcement of Swap Connect further broadened financial co-operation between Hong Kong and the Mainland into the derivatives market and strengthened Hong Kong’s status as a key offshore renminbi business hub and risk management centre. The enhancement of the existing currency swap arrangement between the HKMA and the People’s Bank of China (PBoC) in July was another important milestone in strengthening Hong Kong’s role as an offshore renminbi business hub.

To develop a more diverse range of renminbi-denominated products in Hong Kong, a working group comprising the HKMA, the Securities and Futures Commission (SFC) and Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing Limited (HKEX) completed a feasibility study on expanding the use of the renminbi in equity trading in Hong Kong. The working group has been taking forward the preparation work, including introducing a Dual Counter Market Making (DCMM) regime to enhance the trading mechanism of Hong Kong dollar and renminbi dual-counter stocks.

The HKMA continued to work on strengthening the competitiveness of Hong Kong’s financial platform. In particular, to increase Hong Kong’s appeal as a preferred fund management centre, the HKMA worked closely with the Government and the financial industry to provide a more facilitating tax and regulatory environment. Significant progress was also made in promoting innovation in Hong Kong’s bond market, and consolidating Hong Kong’s position as a regional green and sustainable finance hub. At the same time, the HKMA stepped up market outreach to promote Hong Kong’s financial services to overseas and Mainland stakeholders.

The HKMA Fintech Facilitation Office (FFO), together with the banking departments, continued to implement the “Fintech 2025” strategy to promote wide adoption of financial technology (fintech) and strengthen Hong Kong’s position as a fintech hub in Asia. The key initiatives implemented during the year included:
- promoting regulatory technology (Regtech) adoption and conducting the Tech Baseline Assessment;
- advancing the work on wholesale Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) for improving cross-border payments;
- progressing further in the study on introducing retail CBDC in Hong Kong, i.e. e-HKD;
- launching Commercial Data Interchange (CDI);
- enhancing talent development;
- nurturing the fintech ecosystem with funding and policies;
- strengthening cross-border collaboration in fintech; and
- expanding the adoption of the Faster Payment System (FPS).

Safe and efficient operation of financial infrastructure is fundamental for reinforcing Hong Kong’s position as a leading international financial centre. In 2022, the four interbank Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) systems, the Central Moneymarkets Unit (CMU) and the Hong Kong Trade Repository (HKTR) achieved 100%2 system availability, outperforming the target of 99.95%. The settlement services on Northbound and Southbound Bond Connect remained smooth. Among the debt securities lodged with the CMU at the end of the year, the outstanding amount of Exchange Fund Bills and Notes reached HK$1,207.5 billion, and the outstanding amount of other debt securities rose to HK$1,573.3 billion equivalent, the highest recorded level since 2013.

Adoption of the FPS continued to increase in 2022. The number of registrations grew to 11.48 million at the end of 2022 and the average daily turnover for the year rose by 40% from 2021. The increased use of the FPS for settling Government bills, making merchant payments, and topping up Stored Value Facility (SVF) e-wallets or bank accounts, were the key drivers for the continued rise in the transaction volume on top of the steady growth in person-to-person and business payments.

To promote the safety and efficiency of the local retail payment industry, the HKMA oversees six designated retail payment systems (RPSs) and supervises 17 licensed SVFs (four of which are SVFs issued by licensed banks) under the Payment Systems and Stored Value Facilities Ordinance (PSSVFO). During the year, the HKMA continued to facilitate the smooth implementation of the Government’s Consumption Voucher Scheme by co-ordinating and promoting dialogues and co-operation between the relevant Government parties and the SVF licensees appointed for the scheme.

In January 2023, the HKMA issued the conclusion to the discussion paper on crypto-assets and stablecoins, summarising the feedback received in relation to the discussion paper and the HKMA’s relevant response. The conclusion paper confirmed that the HKMA would take a risk-based and agile approach in regulating stablecoins, and set out the expected regulatory scope and key regulatory requirements as well as next steps.

Internationally, the HKMA is an active member of the central banking community and plays a leadership role in a number of regional and international committees. Since 2018, the HKMA has been serving consecutive terms as the chair of the Working Group on Financial Markets (WGFM) established under the Executives’ Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Banks (EMEAP)3. In addition, the HKMA co-chairs the Policy and Standards Group of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (Basel Committee), as well as the Non-Bank Monitoring Experts Group and the Financial Innovation Network of the Financial Stability Board (FSB). Within the FSB, the HKMA also leads a team that monitors progress and follows up on supervisory issues associated with financial benchmark transition.

# Review of 2022

# Global Financial Leaders’ Investment Summit

The Global Financial Leaders’ Investment Summit takes place on 1–3 November

Following the Financial Secretary’s announcement in the 2022–23 Budget, the HKMA organised the Global Financial Leaders’ Investment Summit in November. The three-day event was a resounding success that featured 26 prominent financial leaders sharing their unique perspectives and ideas on navigating through economic, financial, technological and geopolitical uncertainties in search of opportunities. It was attended by over 200 participants from about 120 international financial institutions, including some of the world’s largest banks, securities firms, asset owners and managers, private equity and venture capital firms, hedge funds and insurers. More than 40 of these institutions were represented by their group chairmen or chief executive officers.

The Summit has sent a powerful message to the world that Hong Kong is back, and enabled global financial leaders to see for themselves the resilience and vibrancy that define Hong Kong, and the opportunities that the city offers to pivot their businesses to the burgeoning Asian markets.

# Hong Kong as the dominant gateway to the Mainland and the global offshore renminbi business hub

Hong Kong reinforced its position as a global hub for offshore renminbi business by enhancing offshore liquidity, further strengthening connectivity with the Mainland financial markets and upgrading financial market infrastructure. Renminbi businesses, including bank deposits, trade settlement, payments and offshore bond issuances, continued to witness robust growth during the year. Encouraging progress and achievements were seen in respect of liquidity enhancement, product development and expansion of the Connect schemes. The results of the 2022 Triennial Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market Turnover by the BIS reaffirmed Hong Kong’s leading position as a renminbi foreign exchange centre.

Northbound Bond Connect continued to serve as a major channel for international investors to invest in the Mainland bond market using market infrastructures and financial services in Hong Kong. Daily turnover under Northbound Bond Connect averaged RMB32.2 billion in 2022 (a 25% increase from 2021) and accounted for 61% of overall trading turnover by foreign investors in the China Interbank Bond Market.

Northbound Bond Connect trading was further facilitated by the introduction of technical enhancements in July, including digitalisation of investors’ participation in onshore primary issuance and a reduction in service fees. These marketoriented enhancements improved operational efficiency and lowered trading costs for investors under Northbound Bond Connect.

To complement Northbound Bond Connect and facilitate global investors’ management of interest rate risks for their bond investments on the Mainland, a new initiative for mutual access between interest rate swap markets in Hong Kong and the Mainland (Swap Connect) was announced in July. With Northbound Trading commencing first in the initial phase, Swap Connect will allow global investors to trade interest rate swap products in the Mainland via an infrastructure link between Hong Kong and the Mainland, thereby strengthening Hong Kong’s status as a risk management centre. Preparation for Swap Connect is under way, with a view to launching Northbound Trading as soon as practicable. The HKMA will continue to, in collaboration with relevant authorities and agencies, explore the provision of more diversified risk management tools, including offshore treasury bond futures, to further support global investors’ investment in the Mainland bond market.

Southbound Bond Connect has received a positive response and operations have been smooth since its launch in 2021, with transactions covering major bond products tradeable in the Hong Kong market and denominated in multiple currencies. The scheme has contributed to the growth of the offshore renminbi market, including the pickup in renminbi-denominated debt securities issuance. The HKMA is working closely with relevant Mainland authorities to explore possible enhancements under Southbound Bond Connect, with a view to enriching Hong Kong’s bond market.
