# Banking Stability

The banking sector in Hong Kong remained sound and stable in 2016 despite increased risks and shocks in the global markets. During the year, the HKMA stepped up its supervisory efforts on the effectiveness of the risk governance framework, as well as the credit and liquidity risk management systems of authorized institutions. As cyber attacks became increasingly prevalent, the HKMA strengthened the supervision of authorized institutions’ technology risk management. The effectiveness of authorized institutions’ anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing controls remained a key supervisory focus of the HKMA as part of its effort to combat financial crime. On conduct supervision, the HKMA took concrete steps to promote a customer-centric culture and foster financial inclusion, and address the difficulties encountered by foreign small and medium-sized enterprises and start-up companies in opening and maintaining bank accounts in Hong Kong. More efforts were also made to supervise authorized institutions’ selling practices for investment and insurance products to further enhance customer protection.

On the policy side, substantial progress was made on the preparatory work for the local implementation of international supervisory and accounting standards, including the net Stable Funding Ratio, large exposure limits, International Financial Reporting Standard 9, and the resolution framework after the enactment of the Financial Institutions (Resolution) ordinance.

# REVIEW OF 2016

# Overview of supervisory activities

In 2016, 188 off-site reviews were conducted covering a broad range of issues, including CAMEL ratings, corporate governance, business operations and risk management of authorized institutions (AIs). The HKMA stepped up its engagement with the boards of directors of AIs in order to strengthen risk governance and culture in the banking sector. Apart from meetings with boards of directors or board-level committees, separate meetings with the independent nonexecutive directors (INEDs) were held to exchange views on culture and risk governance issues. Tripartite meetings among the HKMA, AIs and their external auditors were also conducted. A review was undertaken to assess whether the remuneration systems of AIs are conducive to promoting effective risk management.

In respect of capital adequacy, the HKMA reviewed the capital plans of AIs, including their multi-year capital targets in preparation for the full implementation of Basel III capital buffers in 2019. The solvency stress testing programme was refined, having regard to the prevailing macroeconomic environment. The HKMA also critically assessed the recovery plans of major retail banks and provided feedback on areas requiring enhancement.

In addition to off-site activities, the HKMA continued to conduct regular on-site examinations supplemented with thematic reviews on areas assessed to be of higher risks. This approach has allowed the HKMA to prioritise its supervisory resources to focus on emerging and more significant risks faced by AIs. In 2016, the HKMA conducted 377 on-site examinations and thematic reviews. Credit risk management and controls, particularly those over Mainland-related business, continued to be the focus of these examinations and reviews. Another major focus was anti-money laundering and counter-terrorist financing (AML/CFT) controls. The HKMA also increased the number of on-site examinations and thematic reviews on liquidity, operational and technology risk management. AIs’ activities in securities, investment products, insurance and Mandatory Provident Fund (MPF)-related businesses were also subject to on-site examinations by specialist teams during the year.

Table 1 contains an overall summary of the HKMA’s supervisory activities in 2016.

# Supervision of credit risk

# Credit growth and asset quality

Bank lending increased moderately in 2016. Total outstanding loans grew by 6.5%, compared with a growth of 3.5% in 2015 (table 2). As the increase in customer deposits outpaced the increase in bank lending, the overall loan-to-deposit ratio decreased to 68.4% at the end of 2016 from 70.1% a year earlier.

Table 2 Growth in loans and advances

Mainland-related lending grew by 7% to HK$3,564 billion at the end of 2016 (table 3). This included HK$545 billion of loans booked with Mainland subsidiaries of banks incorporated in Hong Kong.

The asset quality of the banking sector remained healthy in 2016. Retail banks’ classified loan ratio edged up from 0.69% at the end of 2015 to 0.72% at the end of the year, but well below the long-run historical average of 2.4% since 2000. For the banking sector as a whole, the classified loan ratio increased from 0.73% to 0.85%. The asset quality of the industry’s Mainland-related lending showed a similar trend during the year. Retail banks’ classified loan ratio of such lending edged up to 0.82% from 0.78% over the same period. For the banking sector as a whole, the ratio increased to 0.80% from 0.77% a year ago.

The HKMA devoted a significant amount of its supervisory effort to ensure that AIs continued to adopt prudent underwriting standards, and maintained effective loan classification and provisioning systems. Specifically, supervisory attention on credit risks associated with growing exposures to privately owned enterprises in Mainland China and investment in debt securities for yield enhancement purposes was intensified. Thematic reviews on credit risk management in relation to the distribution of high-risk investment products was undertaken.

# Property mortgage lending

The HKMA continued to maintain a high degree of vigilance over AIs’ property lending business. Following the correction in property prices beginning in September 2015, the prices of residential properties reverted to an upward trend in March and rose by 8% in 2016. In December 2016, the average loan-to-value (LTV) ratio for new residential mortgage loans (RMLs) approved reduced to 51%, compared to 64% in September 2009, before the HKMA first introduced countercyclical measures on property lending. The average debt servicing ratio (DSR) for new RMLs approved dropped to 34% in December 2016, from 41% in August 2010, when a cap on DSR was first applied (Chart 1).

Chart 1 Average LTV ratio and DSR of new RMLs
Before the introduction of the first round of the HKMA’s countercyclical measures on property lending Introduction of a cap on DSR

As part of the seventh round of countercyclical measures introduced in February 2015, AIs using an Internal RatingsBased (IRB) approach to calculate credit risk capital charge were required to extend the application of a risk-weight floor of 15% to their entire RMl portfolios rather than only newly granted mortgage loans. This requirement came into effect in June 2016.

During the year, more property developers provided direct mortgage financing to property buyers. The LTV ratios of these mortgage facilities were often higher than that permitted under the prudential requirements applied by the HKMA on AIs. The HKMA monitored the development closely and maintained regular dialogue with AIs to assess whether banks continued to maintain effective risk management over their exposures to property developers. Separately, the Land Registry (LR), at the request of the HKMA, agreed to develop an “e-Alert” service for AIs. AIs that have subscribed to this service will receive electronic notifications when further mortgage documents in respect of properties mortgaged to them are registered with the LR. The introduction of this service will help address the issue of mortgagors seeking further mortgage financing without obtaining the mortgagee AIs’ consent. The LR rolled out the e-Alert service in the first quarter of 2017.

# Supervision of operational and technology risks

Similar to other global financial centres, Hong Kong faced growing cyber threats. In 2016, the HKMA received reports from AIs about cases of unauthorised online share trading transactions and attempts to compromise their payment systems. The HKMA took immediate action to address the risks posed by these attacks. The HKMA issued an e-banking alert to raise the public’s awareness of online share trading frauds and advised them on the precautionary measures they should take. The HKMA also issued a circular to provide AIs with guidance on possible measures to further strengthen their security controls over internet banking services. On the attempts to compromise banks’ payment systems, the HKMA alerted AIs to this type of fraud when these attempts were first detected in Hong Kong. With the help of the police, the HKMA shared the modus operandi used in these frauds and required AIs to take them into account in strengthening their controls over payment operations.

To further enhance the cyber resilience of the banking sector, the HKMA rolled out a Cybersecurity Fortification Initiative (CFI) in May 2016. The CFI comprises three pillars, namely a Cyber Resilience Assessment Framework (C-RAF), a professional Development programme and a Cyber Intelligence Sharing platform (see Fintech Facilitation Office in the chapter on International Financial Centre for more details). In December, the HKMA issued a circular to AIs setting out the C-RAF implementation timeline.

During 2016, the development of fintech gathered pace in the banking sector. Many AIs rolled out new fintech products, particularly in the areas of person-to-person (P2P) small-value payment services, contactless mobile payments and biometric authentication. In September, a Fintech Supervisory Sandbox (FSS) was introduced to enable AIs to conduct pilot trials of their fintech initiatives under a controlled environment without the need to achieve full compliance with the HKMA’s supervisory requirements. The FSS arrangement enabled real-life data and user feedback to be gathered at an early stage so that refinements to the fintech initiatives could be made before the full launch. Up to the end of 2016, six requests for access to the FSS, in respect of new fintech products involving biometric authentication, securities trading and blockchain technology for use in mortgage valuation, were granted. In november, the HKMA also raised the maximum transaction limit for P2P small-value payment services conducted via internet banking without two-factor authentication to HK$5,000 per day per account, in a bid to meet growing demand for convenient P2P payment services.

A series of property-related frauds were reported in 2016 in which fraudsters impersonated property owners and attempted to obtain benefits by seeking mortgage financing or disposing of the properties. Although these cases did not involve AIs, the HKMA worked closely with the police and the Hong Kong Association of Banks (HKAB) to provide guidance to AIs on ways to detect these frauds and stop them from occurring in the banking sector. Over the year, the HKMA published two issues of its Operational Incidents Watch, sharing with the industry lessons learned from past AIs’ operational incidents. The HKMA also conducted on-site examinations and thematic reviews on AIs’ operational risk management frameworks, fraud management practices, trustee/custodian operations, and risk management controls for guarding against rogue or unauthorised trading activities.

# Supervision of treasury activities and liquidity risk

Several major political events took place in 2016, causing significant volatilities in financial markets at various times during the year. Meanwhile, the interest rate normalisation process in the US continued to advance at a slow pace, with the Federal open Market Committee deciding in December to raise the Federal Funds Rate for the second time since the global financial crisis. In preparation for these political events, the HKMA maintained a close dialogue with overseas regulators, assessed the implications for the banking sector in Hong Kong and required banks to stay alert and strengthen their risk management to cope with adverse market developments.

On liquidity risk management, the HKMA conducted additional liquidity stress tests to assess the resilience of the banking sector to cope with severe but plausible liquidity stress scenarios. Follow-up actions were taken to enhance the capability of AIs in coping with these scenarios. After a round of on-site examinations focused on interest rate risk management in 2015, the HKMA conducted additional on-site examinations to evaluate AIs’ market risk management. AIs with identified control weaknesses were asked to take corrective actions.

# Prevention of money laundering and terrorist financing (ML/TF)

The HKMA’s risk-based AML supervision included on-site examinations and desk-based reviews (including event-driven supervisory engagement with AIs), which targeted areas presenting higher Ml/tF risks. The examinations and reviews covered AIs’ assessment of Ml/tF risks, implementation of the risk-based approach, as well as systems and processes for transaction monitoring and sanctions compliance. In 2016, the HKMA’s specialist supervisory resources undertook 17 on-site examinations and 30 desk-based reviews.

In terms of policy development, priority was given to addressing difficulties encountered by certain businesses and individuals when opening bank accounts; guidance and frequently asked questions were issued to clarify certain customer due diligence (CDD) requirements as well as the HKMA’s supervisory expectations on the risk-based approach. Meanwhile, the HKMA continued to work closely with industry associations in issuing guidance to assist AIs to address risks in certain areas, such as trade-based money laundering.
