# International Financial Centre

Hong Kong continues to be a globally competitive international financial centre. During the year, various initiatives were taken forward to facilitate the development and use of fintech in the banking and payment industries. The Faster Payment System has seen a surge in turnover during the year amid the COVID-19 pandemic.

Hong Kong is also a centre of action for capitalising on opportunities from the opening up of the Mainland financial markets. Thanks to world-class market infrastructure and the Connect schemes, Hong Kong is both the favoured platform of Mainland corporates raising funds and the window for international investors seeking exposure to the fast-growing Mainland markets. Headway was made during the year to promote financial collaboration in the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area, especially in helping Hong Kong residents access financial and banking services in the Area more easily.

At the same time, great effort went into opening up new o enhancing the competitiveness of Hong Kong’s financial p including asset and wealth management, corporate treasur sustainable finance. The HKMA also stepped up market outreach to promote Hong Kong’s financial services to overseas and Mainland stakeholders. At a global level, the HKMA is playing a leadership role in a number of regional and international committees, which is a clear recognition of Hong Kong’s expertise and commitment to international work.

# OVERVIEW

To strengthen Hong Kong’s position as a fintech hub in Asia, the HKMA continued to put great effort into implementing various initiatives to facilitate the development and use of technology in the banking and payment industries. The key progress during the year included:
- expanding the adoption of the Faster Payment System (FPS);
- facilitating the implementation of Open Application Programming Interface (Open API) in the banking sector;
- facilitating the digitalisation of trade finance by connecting eTradeConnect and the People’s Bank of China (PBoC) Trade Finance Platform;
- researching the application of Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) to cross-border payments;
- facilitating small and medium-sized enterprise (SME) financing by studying the technical feasibility of the Commercial Data Interchange (CDI) and researching into alternative credit scoring;
- further promoting Regtech adoption by publishing a two-year roadmap to foster a larger and more diverse Regtech ecosystem;
- enhancing talent development; and
- stepping up cross-border collaboration in fintech.

The HKMA Fintech Facilitation Office (FFO), together with the banking departments of the HKMA, plays a pivotal role in driving the implementation of these initiatives.

Inflow into renminbi assets continued to gather pace as major financial market indices started to include or increase weightings in onshore securities. Hong Kong plays an indispensable role in facilitating international investors’ increased allocation in renminbi assets, with its unparalleled access under the Mainland-Hong Kong Connect schemes to the onshore capital markets. In 2020, daily turnover under Bond Connect increased 82% to around RMB19.3 billion. New initiatives were launched to improve Bond Connect operations, including a new special settlement cycle service, extended trading hours, and new arrangements designed to give investors more flexibility in choosing the banks to conduct currency conversion and foreign exchange hedging. Following the success of Northbound Bond Connect, the HKMA has formed a working group with the PBoC to study the framework of Southbound Bond Connect.

Continued efforts were also devoted to enhancing financial facilitation between Hong Kong and Mainland cities in the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area (GBA). The Mainland authorities promulgated a series of initiatives to support financial development in the region. In June, the PBoC, the HKMA and the Monetary Authority of Macao (AMCM) jointly announced the decision to implement the cross-boundary Wealth Management Connect (WMC) scheme. The HKMA has been working closely with the Mainland and local authorities as well as the industry to formulate the implementation details. The HKMA also engaged with the Mainland authorities on other initiatives, so as to expand room for banks in Hong Kong to broaden their scope of cross-boundary businesses. During the year, Hong Kong continued to maintain its role as the global offshore renminbi business hub. Average daily turnover of Hong Kong’s renminbi Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system reached a record high of RMB1.2 trillion.

Great effort went into creating new opportunities to enhance the competitiveness of Hong Kong’s financial platform. To promote the development of the fund business in Hong Kong, the HKMA worked closely with the Government and industry to provide a more favourable tax and regulatory environment for fund formation. Significant effort was also made to continue elevating Hong Kong’s position as a regional green and sustainable finance hub. At the same time, the HKMA stepped up market outreach to promote Hong Kong’s financial services to overseas and Mainland stakeholders.

In the central banking community, the HKMA plays a leadership role in a number of regional and international committees. For example, the HKMA chairs the Policy and Standards Group (PSG) of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (Basel Committee) , and the Working Group on Financial Markets (WGFM) established under the Executives’ Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Banks (EMEAP). The HKMA also co-chairs the Non-Bank Monitoring Experts Group (NMEG) and the Financial Innovation Network (FIN) of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), and leads a team that looks into supervisory issues associated with benchmark transition.

The safe and efficient operation of Hong Kong’s financial infrastructure lays a solid foundation for Hong Kong’s role as an international financial centre. The four interbank RTGS systems, the Central Moneymarkets Unit (CMU) and the Hong Kong Trade Repository (HKTR) achieved 100% system availability in 2020, outperforming the target of 99.95%. Through its accounts set up with the two Mainland central securities depositories (CSDs), the CMU continued to facilitate the settlement of Bond Connect transactions conducted under Bond Connect Northbound Trading and holding of Mainland debt securities on behalf of relevant CMU members.

Adoption of the FPS continued to increase in 2020. The number of registrations reached 6.9 million at the end of 2020 and the transaction volume for the year rose by two times from 2019. The Government’s acceptance of FPS payment and greater merchant adoption were the key drivers for the marked increase in transaction volume on top of the steady growth in person-to-person payments.

To ensure the general safety and efficiency of the local retail payment industry, the HKMA has designated and oversees six retail payment systems (RPSs) under the Payment Systems and Stored Value Facilities Ordinance (PSSVFO). The HKMA also continues to supervise 18 stored value facility (SVF) licensees.

# REVIEW OF 2020

# Hong Kong as a Fintech Hub in Asia

# Faster Payment System

Since the launch of the FPS in September 2018, the number of participants has grown to 35 banks and 12 SVFs with the addition of five banks and one SVF in 2020. The usage of the FPS has also grown steadily. As of 31 December, the FPS had recorded 6.9 million registrations (Chart 1). To facilitate institutions’ payments to the general public, the system was enhanced to introduce the Hong Kong Identity Card (HKID) number as an account proxy starting from 6 December. More than 110,000 registrations were recorded in less than a month after the introduction of this enhancement. This new function is not intended for making person-to-person payments and will only be used by institutions which already possess the HKID number of the recipients in making payments (for example, disbursing salaries). As the HKID number is a unique identifier for each Hong Kong citizen, such an account proxy can ensure correct payment is made to a recipient without requiring the recipient to disclose the bank account number.

Chart 1 Registration of FPS proxy identifiers

The COVID-19 pandemic and social distancing measures have given new impetus to the use of electronic payment service. The turnover of the FPS rose particularly fast during the year (Chart 2). The average daily turnover reached 505,000 real-time transactions (worth HK$5.2 billion and RMB95 million) in December 2020, three times of the 168,000 transactions in December 2019 and tenfold of that in October 2018, the first full month of operation after the launch of the FPS. The increased use of the FPS has also been spurred by steady growth of adoption and a gradual extension in the scope of usage, from primarily person-to-person payments at the initial stage to bill, retail and business payments, including Government bill payments.

Chart 2 Average daily turnover of Hong Kong dollar real-time payments

The HKMA has been working with various government departments and the banking industry to extend the usage of the FPS from person-to-person payments to bill payments and other merchant payments. The Government has adopted the FPS for bill payments since November 2019, with a view to promoting the FPS and facilitating the public. The public can easily scan the QR code printed on the bills with supporting mobile banking or SVF e-wallet apps to pay taxes, rates and government rent, water charges and General Demand Notes issued by the Government. As of December 2020, 1.8 million government bill payment transactions involving HK$2.2 billion had been made through the FPS. Riding on the successful launch of the government bill payments, four additional government departments have started accepting FPS QR code payments at designated counters and self-help kiosks starting 21 December 2020. Online payment via the FPS is also being explored.

In another positive development, an increasing number of both large and small merchants have adopted FPS to support their business operations. Merchant payments surged to average 100,000 transactions a day in December 2020, 38 times more than in December 2019. The FPS is commonly used to pay bills, make in-app direct debits and complete other online purchases. The increasing popularity of SVF e-wallets also contributed to a surge in account top-up transactions via the FPS. Average daily top-up transactions in December 2020 was sevenfold of that in December 2019.

To continue raising public awareness of the FPS, the HKMA has developed a selection of education and publicity materials, such as Announcements in the Public Interest on television and a series of smart tips on social media platforms. The HKMA also organised a Whatsapp stickers design competition for secondary school students to raise their awareness of e-payments. Outreach efforts were also made to various charity organisations and operators of wet markets to promote the adoption of FPS for making and receiving payments. Some FPS participating banks and SVFs also launched promotional campaigns, including offers of incentives, to encourage customer registration with the FPS and the use of FPS for fund transfer and bill payment. Building on the progress made in 2020, the HKMA worked with banks and SVFs to promote giving e-laisee via FPS in early 2021. The HKMA launched a publicity campaign on e-laisee while banks and SVFs offered incentives to encourage their customers to give e-laisee so as to go green and support the anti-pandemic efforts.

# Open Application Programming Interface

The HKMA continued to facilitate the development and adoption of Open API by the banking sector in line with the four-phase approach of the Open API Framework. Banks have launched Phases I and II Open APIs and are using them to collaborate with thirdparty service providers on various innovative services that improve customer experience. Separately, the HKMA has been conducting a study on the implementation of Phases III and IV Open APIs. A leaflet was published in November to present the findings of the survey in the study.

# eTradeConnect

With the goal of providing importers and exporters with more convenient trade finance services, a proof-ofconcept study was initiated to explore connecting eTradeConnect and the PBoC Trade Finance Platform. The first phase of the proof-of-concept study was completed in the fourth quarter of the year. A pilot run was subsequently launched. Banks in Hong Kong and Mainland China have used the connection to execute cross-border trade finance transactions.

# Cross-border payments

On CBDC, the HKMA and the Bank of Thailand continued their joint research project to study the application of CBDC to cross-border payments, with a view to facilitating HKD-THB payment-versuspayment (PvP) among banks in Hong Kong and Thailand. The first phase of the project was completed, with a joint report published in January to present the key findings, and a blockchain-based crossborder corridor network prototype developed to raise the efficiency and lower the cost of cross-border payments. The second phase of the project has begun, with a focus on exploring business use cases in cross-border trade settlement and capital market transactions. The project also attracted the interest of other members of the central banking community. The Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the Central Bank of the United Arab Emirates, and the Digital Currency Institute of the PBoC announced their participation in the project in early 2021.
