# Economic and Financial Environment

The Hong Kong economy contracted in 2019, reflecting global economic slowdown, lingering US-China trade conflicts and local social incidents. As economic conditions deteriorated rapidly in the second half of the year, the labour market faced increasing pressures. Inflation also increased due to a sharp rise in pork prices. Economic performance for 2020 is expected to remain challenging as the novel coronavirus outbreak hits the already weakening economy. Given the difficult economic environment, the Government and the HKMA have rolled out measures to support the economy, especially households and small and medium-sized enterprises.

# THE ECONOMY IN REVIEW

# Real activities

Following a 2.9% expansion in 2018, the Hong Kong economy contracted by 1.2% in 2019, marking the first annual contraction since 2009. In particular, the economy entered into a recession in the second half of the year, with the seasonally adjusted real Gross Domestic Product (GDP) shrinking consecutively in the second, third and fourth quarters (Table 1). The decline in economic activities reflected a notable reduction in domestic demand (Chart 1). As the local social incidents weighed significantly on consumption activities and sentiments in the latter part of the year, private consumption expenditure recorded the first annual decline since 2003. Overall investment spending also dropped amid dampened business sentiments. On the external front, slowing global economic growth and additional tariffs levied amid the US-China trade tensions led to a decline in Hong Kong’s exports of goods. Exports of services also saw the largest annual decline on record because the social incidents led to a severe deterioration in inbound tourism. With smaller domestic and re-export-induced demand, imports of goods and services also worsened. On a net basis, net trade contributed positively to GDP in 2019 (Chart 1) because total imports declined even faster than total exports.

In view of the strong economic headwinds, the Government introduced several rounds of measures between August and December 2019 to alleviate the financial burden of residents, safeguard jobs and support enterprises, particularly small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) as well as those in the hard-hit sectors, such as retail, food services, transport and tourism. To allow banks to be more supportive to the domestic economy and help mitigate the economic cycle, the HKMA announced on 14 October a reduction in the Countercyclical Capital Buffer ratio of banks from 2.5% to 2.0%, thereby providing banks with more flexibility to release HK$200–300 billion in bank credit to enterprises including SMEs, and also established a Banking Sector SME Lending Coordination Mechanism. A new relief measure for the 80% Guarantee product of the SME Financing Guarantee Scheme (SFGS) was introduced in September, allowing SME borrowers facing weakening cash flows to apply for principal moratorium to get immediate support. Further, a new 90% loan guarantee product under the SFGS was introduced in December to provide additional support to SMEs, businesses with relatively less operating experience, as well as professionals seeking to set up their own practices, to obtain financing.

# Monetary conditions

The Hong Kong dollar exchange rate and money markets functioned in a smooth and orderly manner in 2019. The Hong Kong dollar exchange rate remained broadly stable throughout the year. As the weak-side Convertibility Undertaking was triggered in March, the HKMA purchased Hong Kong dollars from, and sold US dollars to, banks at the rate of HK$7.85/US$1, leading to a decline in the Aggregate Balance in accordance with the design of the Linked Exchange Rate System. The Hong Kong dollar interbank interest rates remained largely steady at the longer end, while short-term rates generally picked up. At the retail level, several retail banks lowered their Best Lending Rates by 12.5 basis points in late October following the decreases in the target range for the US federal funds rate. As for monetary aggregates, total bank loans increased by 6.7% in 2019, up from 4.4% in 2018, and total deposits grew by 2.9% during the year.

# Inflation

The underlying inflation rate, which nets out the effects of the Government’s one-off relief measures, rose slightly to 3.0% in 2019, from 2.6% in 2018. The mild increase in inflation was mainly driven by the elevated pork prices due to the disrupted supply of fresh pork since May (Chart 2). Excluding basic food items, price pressures were held at moderate levels throughout the year. In particular, the housing component of consumer price inflation softened in tandem with an earlier consolidation of fresh-letting private residential rentals. More broadly, the mild growth in nominal wages and the slower increase in commercial rentals1 helped keep local business costs in check. Externally, import price inflation moderated, in line with lower inflation in some of Hong Kong’s major import sources amid slower global economic growth.

# Labour market

The labour market remained broadly resilient in the first half of 2019 but faced mounting pressures in the second half (Chart 3). After staying at a multi-year low of 2.8% in the first two quarters, the seasonally adjusted unemployment rate rose to 2.9% in the third quarter and 3.3% in the final quarter, with those for the consumption and tourism-related sectors recording even more visible rises amid the social incidents. Overall labour demand also shrank visibly in the latter part of the year as total employment and the number of privatesector vacancies fell. The reduction in labour demand was particularly prominent in the retail, accommodation and food services sectors, as well as import/export trade and construction sectors. On the supply side, the labour force participation rate edged down, partly due to a cyclical response to the economic recession. As the labour market came under increasing pressures, growth in nominal wage and earnings showed signs of a slowdown towards the end of the year.

# Stock market

The local stock market experienced sharp fluctuations during 2019. After a market rally in the first four months, the Hang Seng Index plunged in May due in part to concerns about the re-escalation of the US-China trade tensions (Chart 4). While recouping some lost ground in June in response to major central banks’ signals of a more accommodative monetary stance, stock prices came under pressure again amid slowing global economic growth and local social incidents. Towards the end of the year, stock prices regained some upward momentum following the announcement of a “phase one” trade agreement between the US and Mainland China. The Hang Seng Index finished the year at 28,190, registering an overall gain of 9.1% for the year. By contrast, the average daily turnover declined by about 19% from a year earlier. The listings of a major Mainland tech company and a leading beer manufacturer helped expand equity funds raised through initial public offerings (IpOs) to HK$314.2 billion in 2019. Hong Kong ranked first globally in terms of funds raised through IpOs for a second straight year in 2019.

# Property market

The residential property market staged a strong rebound in the first five months of 2019 but generally softened in the remainder of the year. Market sentiment improved in early 2019 partly because concerns over US-China trade tensions temporarily eased, but the sentiment was dampened afterwards by the re-escalated US-China trade tensions, prolonged social incidents and weakened domestic economic conditions. Overall housing prices moderated by 5% from the peak in May through December, though still recording an annual growth of 5% due to a 10% rebound in the first five months (Chart 4). Transaction volume in 2019 increased by 4% to 59,797 units from a year earlier, reflecting the strong trading activities in the early part of the year. Housing affordability remained stretched, with the price-toincome ratio and the income-gearing ratio staying high at 17.9 and 80.9 respectively, far above their long-term averages.2 To assist home buyers with immediate housing needs, the Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation (HKMC) in mid-October raised the cap on the value of completed residential properties eligible for a mortgage loan under the Mortgage Insurance programme.3 On the other hand, the non-residential property market faced stronger downward pressures in 2019. In particular, both prices and rentals for retail premises registered the largest declines since the global financial crisis in 2008, reflecting the worsening business conditions during the year.

# OUTLOOK FOR THE ECONOMY

# Economic environment

Hong Kong’s economic performance for 2020 is expected to be very challenging, with significant near-term downside risks associated with the coronavirus outbreak. Some sectors, such as retail, accommodation, food services, tourism and transport, which have yet to recover from the disruptions caused by the social incidents, will be doubly hit. However, the countercyclical fiscal measures announced in the 2020/21 Budget, which include a one-off cash handout and a new concessionary low-interest loan under the SFGS with 100% Government guarantee, are expected to provide some support to the economy, especially households and SMEs. On 16 March 2020, the HKMA further reduced the Countercyclical Capital Buffer ratio of banks from 2.0% to 1.0%, which will allow banks to be more supportive to the domestic economy, in particular those sectors and individuals that are expected to experience additional short-term stress due to the impact arising from the coronavirus outbreak. Analysed by GDP component, private consumption and investment are likely to remain weak because of the fragile consumer and business confidence. While government consumption will contribute to economic growth, public investment expenditure is anticipated to be relatively sluggish following the completion of some major infrastructure projects. On the external front, the “phase one” trade deal between the US and Mainland China is assessed to be slightly positive for the local economy in the short term. However, Hong Kong’s external trade performance will continue to be weighed down by weak global economic growth and trade flows. In particular, the coronavirus outbreak may lead to regional supply chain disruptions and slower cross-border economic activities, in tourism for example, thereby restraining Hong Kong’s exports. The Government forecasts real GDP growth for 2020 in the range of -1.5% to 0.5%, while growth forecasts by international organisations and privatesector analysts averaged -3.3%.

# Inflation and the labour market

Inflationary pressures are expected to moderate in 2020 because of the sub-par economic conditions, the consolidation of private residential rentals and mild imported inflation. Market consensus forecasts a headline inflation rate for 2020 of 1.8%, and the Government projects the headline and underlying inflation rates to be 1.7% and 2.5% respectively. In the labour market, the unemployment rate is likely to rise further in the near term, given the weakened economic prospects and the coronavirus outbreak. privatesector analysts expect the unemployment rate to rise to about 4.0% in 2020.

# Uncertainties and risks

The subdued economic outlook for 2020 is subject to a number of uncertainties and risks, including those stemming from the slowing global economy, US-China trade relations, Mainland’s economic performance, local social incidents and the persistence of the coronavirus outbreak. In particular, a prolonged coronavirus outbreak could trigger a more visible global economic slowdown and a repricing of assets, with the resulting unfavourable macroeconomic environment and tighter financial conditions posing further downward pressures on domestic real activities. However, the more concerted effort by major central banks to ease their monetary policies may provide a cushion against the negative economic impact inflicted by the outbreak.

# PERFORMANCE OF THE BANKING SECTOR

The Hong Kong banking sector was resilient in 2019 despite the challenging environment with the global economic slowdown, US-China trade tensions and local social incidents. Bank balance sheet trends were stable, as both loans and deposits grew moderately. The capital and liquidity positions of the banking sector remained solid and asset quality held up well. The banking sector remained profitable with stable average return on asset.
