# Monetary Stability

The Hong Kong dollar exchange rate and money markets functioned in a smooth and orderly manner in 2019. The Hong Kong dollar exchange rate remained stable throughout the year and strengthened to the strong side of the Convertibility Zone towards the end of the year. As the cornerstone of Hong Kong’s monetary and financial stability, the Linked Exchange Rate System has shown its resilience to shocks time after time.

# OBJECTIVES

The overriding objective of Hong Kong’s monetary policy is currency stability. This is defined as a stable external exchange value of Hong Kong’s currency, in terms of its exchange rate in the foreign-exchange market against the US dollar, within a band of HK$7.75–7.85 to US$1. The structure of the monetary system is characterised by Currency Board arrangements, requiring the Monetary Base to be at least 100% backed by US dollar reserves held in the Exchange Fund, and changes in the Monetary Base to be 100% matched by corresponding changes in US dollar reserves.

The Monetary Base (Table 1) comprises:

- Certificates of Indebtedness, which provide full backing to the banknotes issued by the three note-issuing banks

- Government-issued notes and coins in circulation the Aggregate Balance, which is the sum of the clearing account balances of banks kept with the HKMA

- Exchange Fund Bills and Notes (EFBNs) issued by the HKMA on behalf of the Government.

The stability of the Hong Kong dollar exchange rate is maintained through an automatic interest rate adjustment mechanism and the firm commitment by the HKMA to honour the Convertibility Undertakings (CUs). When the demand for Hong Kong dollars is greater than the supply and the market exchange rate strengthens to the strong-side CU of HK$7.75 to one US dollar, the HKMA stands ready to sell Hong Kong dollars to banks for US dollars upon request. The Aggregate Balance will then expand to push down Hong Kong dollar interest rates, creating monetary conditions that move the Hong Kong dollar away from the strong-side limit to within the Convertibility Zone of 7.75 to 7.85. Conversely, if the supply of Hong Kong dollars is greater than demand and the market exchange rate weakens to the weak-side CU of HK$7.85 to one US dollar, the HKMA stands ready to buy Hong Kong dollars from banks upon request. The Aggregate Balance will then contract to drive Hong Kong dollar interest rates up, pushing the Hong Kong dollar away from the weak-side limit to stay within the Convertibility Zone.

# REVIEW OF 2019

# Exchange rate stability

Despite uncertainties in the external environment and a slowdown in the domestic economy, the Hong Kong dollar remained stable and traded in a smooth and orderly manner in 2019. In the beginning of the year, the widening negative Hong Kong dollar-US dollar interest rate spreads attracted carry trade activities of selling Hong Kong dollars for US dollars, pushing the Hong Kong dollar exchange rate towards the weak-side CU of 7.85 (Chart 1). As the weakening of the Hong Kong dollar exchange rate continued, the weak-side CU was eventually triggered eight times in March. Thereafter, the Hong Kong dollar continued to stay near the weak-side CU rate of 7.85. Since late May, the strong Hong Kong dollar demand arising from sizeable initial public offering (IPO) activities, corporates’ demand for dividend payment and the half-year closing had led the Hong Kong dollar to strengthen. While the Hong Kong dollar drifted lower after the half-year mark, it regained momentum from late October and stayed in the strong side of the Convertibility Zone towards the end of the year. This reflected partly equity-related demand including IPOs, and partly the unwinding of short Hong Kong dollar positions due to tightened liquidity near the year end. Overall, the Hong Kong dollar exchange market functioned normally throughout 2019.

Due to the triggering of the weak-side CU, the total of the Aggregate Balance (before Discount Window) and outstanding EFBNs declined from HK$1,136.2 billion at the end of 2018 to HK$1,133.0 billion at the end of 2019 (Chart 2). During the year, the HKMA purchased a total of HK$22.1 billion at the request of banks at the weak-side CU of 7.85 in accordance with the design of the Linked Exchange Rate System (LERS), leading to a contraction of the Aggregate Balance (before Discount Window) from HK$76.4 billion at the end of 2018 to HK$54.3 billion at the end of 2019. The outstanding EFBNs increased slightly from HK$1,059.8 billion to HK$1,078.7 billion during the year, reflecting the issuance of EFBNs to absorb EFBNs’ interest payments according to the established practice. The Monetary Base as a whole remained fully backed by foreign exchange reserves. Total Aggregate Balance (before Discount Window) and outstanding Exchange Fund Bills and Notes at HK$1,133 billion at end-2019.

# Money market

During 2019, the Hong Kong dollar interbank interest rates remained largely steady at the longer end, while short-term rates broadly picked up (Chart 3). Short-term rates also experienced more fluctuations driven by IpO-related funding demand and seasonal liquidity needs. The reduction in the Aggregate Balance since April 2018 may have led to a higher sensitivity of the Hong Kong dollar interbank rates to changes in the supply and demand of Hong Kong dollar funding in the local market.

The Base Rate was adjusted downwards on 1 August, 19 September and 31 October by a total of 75 basis points, from 2.75% at the end of 2018 to 2.00% in early November, as the target range for the US federal funds rate moved downward three times by a total of 75 basis points from 2.25–2.50% to 1.50–1.75% during the year. On 18–26 November and 19–31 December, the Base Rate was set higher than 2.00%, reflecting a marked upward trend of the overnight and one-month Hong Kong Interbank Offered Rates (HIBORs) in the last two months of the year. As such, the Base Rate closed at 2.49% at the end of 2019. The adjustment of the Base Rate was in accordance with the revised formula announced on 26 March 2009, which sets the Base Rate at either 50 basis points above the lower bound of the prevailing target range for the US federal funds rate or the average of the five-day moving averages of the overnight and one-month HIBORs, whichever is the higher. On the retail front, several retail banks lowered their Best Lending Rates by 12.5 basis points following the decrease in the target range for the US federal funds rate in late October.

The discounts of the Hong Kong dollar forward points widened during the first two months, broadly tracking the movements of the Hong Kong dollar-US dollar interest rate spreads, with the 12-month Hong Kong dollar forward points reaching about -708 pips in mid-February (Chart 4). Thereafter, along with the narrowing of the negative Hong Kong dollar-US dollar interest rate spreads, the discounts of the Hong Kong dollar forward points narrowed gradually and turned to premiums towards the end of the year. Overall, Hong Kong’s money markets operated in an orderly manner. Discount Window borrowing decreased to HK$38.3 billion in 2019 from HK$40.2 billion in 2018.

# The Linked Exchange Rate System

The LERS has contributed significantly to Hong Kong’s monetary and financial stability for more than three decades and has shown its resilience in multiple regional and global financial crises. Against the backdrop of social incidents happening during the year, a number of unfounded rumours casting doubt on the LERS and financial stability of Hong Kong circulated in the social media. The HKMA acted promptly and vigorously to rebut the rumours and reassure the public through the use of both traditional and social media, reiterating that the LERS would remain in place and Hong Kong would not impose foreign exchange or capital controls. In addition, the HKMA issued a number of articles to help the public understand the LERS operation, the flow of funds and the interest rate outlook. These efforts were effective in maintaining public confidence in the LERS, as evidenced by the orderly functioning of the markets throughout the year. The Government is also firmly committed to the LERS. public confidence in the Government’s commitment and the use of the Hong Kong dollar as a means of payment and storage of value were further reinforced by the stability in the foreign exchange and money markets. In its 2019 Article IV consultation with Hong Kong, the International Monetary Fund reaffirmed its long-standing support for the LERS as an anchor of Hong Kong’s financial stability, and commented that the LERS remained the appropriate exchange rate arrangement for Hong Kong underpinned by Hong Kong’s transparent rules, ample fiscal and foreign reserves, strong financial regulation and supervision, a flexible economy, and a prudent fiscal framework.

A robust banking system is crucial to the normal functioning of the LERS. Hong Kong’s banking system is highly liquid and sound, with liquidity positions and capitalisation being well above the minimum international standards. To ensure the resilience of the banking sector, the HKMA has been closely monitoring banks’ management of credit, liquidity and interest rate risks and stress-test results, and has maintained its supervisory efforts on corporate, propertyrelated and Mainland-related lending. With a smaller Aggregate Balance relative to previous years, banks have in general strengthened their liquidity management arrangements and have been more proactive in managing their day-to-day funding positions. Furthermore, the HKMA has maintained close dialogue with banks to ensure smooth recycling of liquidity in the market, especially ahead of and during the subscription periods of large IPOs. No settlement gridlocks were noted during the year, with the Discount Window continuing to function effectively and efficiently.

To improve the transparency of the Currency Board Account, a specific portion of Exchange Fund assets has been allocated to back the Monetary Base since October 1998. The Backing Ratio (defined as the Backing Assets divided by the Monetary Base) moved within a range of 109.9–112.1% during 2019, without touching the Upper or Lower Trigger Level. The ratio closed at 111.2% on 31 December (Chart 5). Under the LERS, while specific Exchange Fund assets have been designated for the Backing portfolio, all Exchange Fund assets are available to support the Hong Kong dollar exchange rate. In the event of abrupt shocks, the sizeable amount of financial resources of the Exchange Fund, together with Hong Kong’s robust banking system, will provide powerful support to Hong Kong’s monetary and financial stability.

# Other activities

The Currency Board Sub-Committee (CBC) of the Exchange Fund Advisory Committee monitors and reviews issues relevant to monetary and financial stability in Hong Kong. In 2019, the CBC considered issues including an event study on the LERS operations, the relationship between the Aggregate Balance and interest rates in Hong Kong, an improved and more flexible approach to options markets’ views about the LERS, and the impact of future IPOs on HIBORs. Records of the CBC’s discussions on these issues and reports on Currency Board operations submitted to the CBC are published on the HKMA website.

# Research

The Hong Kong Institute for Monetary and Financial Research (HKIMR), formerly the Hong Kong Institute for Monetary Research, pursues research studies on topics in monetary policy, banking and finance that are policy relevant. This is reflected in the wide array of topics explored by HKIMR researchers and overseas visitors and in its conferences and events. The HKIMR collaborates with major central banks and policy institutions to jointly organise policy-focused conferences. Its research visiting programmes support research projects on policy issues that are of importance to the HKMA, Hong Kong and the region.

In 2019, the HKIMR hosted 14 research scholars, published 17 working papers, and held 11 public seminars covering a broad range of economic, monetary and financial issues. It also organised three international conferences:

- The Tenth Annual International Conference on the Chinese Economy, titled “China’s Financial Reforms and Economic Transformation”, was held on 10–11 January in Hong Kong, organised jointly by the HKIMR, the Financial Research Institute of the people’s Bank of China and the Research Institute of Finance of the Development Research Centre of the State Council. The conference provided a world-class forum for economic experts from central banks, international institutions, academia and the financial industry to discuss issues related to the risks that Mainland’s financial sector faced in the light of changes introduced by financial reforms and Mainland’s economic development.
