# Managing uncertainties by staying vigilant

For the HKMA, the year 2024 was marked by resilience and strength in the face of heightened uncertainty. The global landscape underwent profound changes, characterised by military conflicts in different parts of the world, pivotal elections reshaping geopolitics, and a global economy beset by unpredictability. Despite these challenges, major economies achieved steady growth as policymakers worldwide adeptly balanced the imperatives of taming inflation with the pursuit of tangible economic progress. Further, as the US cut interest rates for the first time in four years and the Mainland unveiled a series of supportive policies, some in the market had reason to feel optimistic. Still, the broader perspective continued to reflect a high degree of uncertainty.

To navigate such challenging times, the best strategy is to stay focused on our core strengths and unique value propositions as the offshore renminbi (RMB) business hub, fintech hub, and green and sustainable finance hub, all of which are important underpinnings of our status as a premier international financial centre. In 2024, we made significant strides on these important fronts. I am pleased that the international community continued to show confidence in our work, as demonstrated by the strong support we once again received for our flagship Global Financial Leaders’ Investment Summit and many other activities and initiatives.

As the Hong Kong economy underwent cyclical and structural adjustments, we worked with banks to strengthen the support for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) by alleviating their debt servicing burden amid a high interest rate environment, while also providing better support for their ongoing development. These concerted efforts, coupled with a series of policy measures and initiatives implemented by the Central and HKSAR governments, contributed to Hong Kong’s gradual economic recovery. In 2024, our economy saw moderate growth of 2.5%.

As we move into 2025, heightened uncertainty continues to loom over the global economy, propelled by paradigm shifts in an increasingly complex and fragile geopolitical landscape. Higher tariffs and protectionist trade policies could disrupt global supply chains and exacerbate geo-economic fragmentation, introducing further ambiguity to the global economy. Any escalation in geopolitical tensions could impede real economic activity and trigger bouts of volatility in global financial markets.

At the HKMA, we shall remain vigilant in these testing times. We are steadfastly committed to fulfilling our mandate to safeguard Hong Kong’s monetary and banking stability, while reinforcing its position as a pre-eminent international financial centre. We will forge stronger ties with market participants to drive advancements in emerging domains, ensuring that Hong Kong remains in the vanguard of global financial development.

# Linked Exchange Rate System — Our staunch anchor

Established more than four decades ago, the Linked Exchange Rate System (LERS) has been the cornerstone of monetary and financial stability in Hong Kong, demonstrating remarkable resilience in weathering a multitude of economic and interest rate cycles.

In 2024, despite uncertainties surrounding US interest rate policies, the Hong Kong dollar (HKD) market continued to operate smoothly, consistent with the design of the LERS. The HKD moved within the Convertibility Zone of HK$7.75–7.85 per US dollar throughout the year, moderating slightly in the first four months amid softened liquidity and then gradually strengthening, ending the year near the strong side of the zone. The stable exchange rate reflects market confidence in the system, a confidence shared by the International Monetary Fund and the international financial community.

The HKMA’s proactive public engagement efforts to explain and expound on the mechanics and merits of the LERS, complemented by rigorous market surveillance, enhance confidence in the LERS. We have harnessed granular data and integrated sophisticated data analytics and artificial intelligence tools to strengthen our capability for more timely and comprehensive market monitoring and financial stability analysis.

# Healthy banking sector despite headwinds

Despite multiple macro headwinds, the Hong Kong banking system demonstrated resilience in 2024, underpinned by strong capital and liquidity positions. The consolidated total capital ratio of local banks stood at 21.8% as of the end of 2024, above the international minimum requirement of 8%. Liquidity was also ample, with a robust coverage ratio of 178.4% for large banks in the fourth quarter of 2024, compared to the statutory minimum threshold of 100%. Although the classified loan ratio rose to 1.96% by year-end driven by persistently high interest rates, ongoing debt issues for some Mainland property developers, and a subdued local commercial real estate market, the associated risks were contained. This was achieved through the banks’ adherence to prudent credit risk management practices and the maintenance of adequate provisions.

While maintaining rigorous surveillance of the credit risk landscape including prudent management of the risks inherent in property mortgage loans, the HKMA, in response to changes in market conditions, implemented two rounds of adjustments to the countercyclical macroprudential measures for property mortgage loans in 2024. These adjustments were made in response to the evolving property markets and the associated risks to the banking sector. Notably, the maximum loan-to-value ratio and debt-service ratio limits for all residential properties were restored to their pre-2009 levels, prior to the introduction of the countercyclical macroprudential measures.

Apart from stepping up our focus on banks’ credit risk management, we also worked to strengthen banks’ operational and technology resilience, addressing the growing dependence on third-party service providers which poses new challenges for banks. The global CrowdStrike incident in July last year, for example, highlighted the severe consequences of operational failures in today’s interconnected world. While its impact on banks in Hong Kong was minimal, it underscored the importance of the HKMA’s work to ensure that banks adopt robust frameworks to protect the continuity of critical operations during severe but plausible scenarios. Encouragingly, all banks in Hong Kong have developed operational resilience frameworks and are now in the critical stage of conducting mapping and scenario testing exercises to identify and address vulnerabilities in delivering their critical operations.

At the same time, amid evolving cyber threats, the HKMA has intensified its efforts to strengthen the banking sector’s cyber resilience by issuing new guidance, conducting thematic reviews, and conducting a cross-sectoral Cyber Mapping exercise in collaboration with other domestic financial authorities. This exercise aims to assess and address systemic cyber risks arising from the interconnections among financial institutions, financial market infrastructures, and technology service providers. With a pilot of this exercise having been concluded in 2024, the full-scale exercise will take place this year.

Another trend borne out of technological advancement is the increasing threat and sophistication of financial fraud and scams, requiring co-ordinated responses from banks, regulators, law enforcement agencies, and the public. We have required banks to reinforce their internet banking security controls, along with their monitoring and surveillance systems. The Fraud and Money Laundering Intelligence Taskforce (FMLIT) was expanded to include all major retail banks plus six Stored Value Facility licensees last year, increasing the speed and scale of intelligence exchange, resulting in a greater amount of criminal proceeds being confiscated. Meanwhile, the consultation on legislative changes to facilitate bank-to-bank information sharing has received broad support and should further enhance the detection and prevention of financial crime.

Beyond these efforts, it remains critical to keep the public informed and vigilant about suspicious transactions while empowering them to take action to protect themselves. The coverage of pre-transaction alerts warning users about suspicious accounts was expanded in 2024, while the Anti-Scam Consumer Protection Charter 2.0 was also enhanced to bring in more stakeholders with the common goal of protecting the public against fraud. As an additional safeguard against fraudsters, “Money Safe” was initiated, allowing customers to segregate a portion of their deposits for better protection against fraud and scams.

In addition to the various efforts to empower customers to better protect themselves against fraud and scams mentioned above, we also prioritised enhancing their ability to avoid impulsive and excessive borrowing. We mandated last year that retail banks offer a minimum seven-day coolingoff period for unsecured consumer credit products, enabling consumers to carefully reconsider their financial obligations and assess their repayment capacity after entering into a credit agreement. Meanwhile, one of our consumer data infrastructure projects, “Credit Data Smart”, was successfully launched last year, marking a significant milestone in enhancing consumer credit reference services.

Alongside our supervisory efforts, another key focus of our work in 2024 was supporting a continued flow of credit through the real economy, especially for SMEs, which are the backbone of Hong Kong’s economy. Last year, we joined forces with the banking sector to roll out “9+5” support measures to facilitate SMEs’ access to bank financing and foster their upgrade and transformation. Banks have committed not to demand early repayment from mortgage customers who remain current on their repayments or to reduce credit limits based solely on declines in collateral value. To date, over 39,000 SMEs have benefitted from credit reliefs and newly approved loans totalling HK$95 billion, and banks have set aside around HK$390 billion of dedicated funds in their loan portfolio to support the continuous development of SMEs amid evolving market conditions. Furthermore, the HKMA and HKAB jointly established the Taskforce on SME Lending to provide support to SMEs on both individual and industry-wide levels. In light of recent trade tensions and uncertainties surrounding the external economic environment, we introduced in April 2025 three sector-specific measures to further support SMEs from various industries, as well as two more measures to support Hong Kong’s economic development.

In our developmental work to promote the stability and effective working of the banking system, we continued to drive technology adoption and encourage rapid uptake of fintech in the banking sector. Today, all retail banks in Hong Kong have adopted fintech in their operations. Recognising its potential in enhancing risk management, fraud prevention and customer experience within the banking sector, the HKMA partnered with Cyberport to launch a Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) Sandbox last year to encourage the responsible adoption of GenAI by banks. We also issued guidance to banks, emphasising the importance of ensuring consumer protection when adopting GenAI in customer facing applications. Within the HKMA, we are utilising GenAI to enhance the efficiency of our analytical and supervisory work. More broadly, we continued to foster collaboration and innovation within the fintech ecosystem by connecting the financial services and technology sectors via the new FiNETech series of events, the new “Fintech Connect” matching platform, and a suite of cross-sectoral activities.

# Affirming international financial centre status

While 2024 presented a landscape fraught with challenges and uncertainties, Hong Kong not only remained firmly anchored as a leading international financial centre, but also continued to grow in scope and stature.

Our unique role as a vital conduit in global finance, seamlessly bridging Mainland China with international markets, remains pivotal and unparalleled. Through targeted initiatives and synergistic collaboration, Hong Kong has further solidified its position as a regional hub for fintech and sustainable finance. For a comprehensive overview of our efforts in green and sustainable finance, readers are invited to peruse the Sustainability Report 2024.

# Stellar growth in renminbi business and deepening financial co-operation with the Mainland

The growth momentum of Hong Kong’s RMB business continued in 2024 with significant expansion across trade settlement payments, offshore bond issuances and, notably, offshore bank lending. This growth was underscored by the RMB Real-Time Gross Settlement system, which achieved a record-high average daily turnover of RMB3.1 trillion, reflecting Hong Kong’s increasing prominence as the global offshore RMB business hub.

We continued our concerted efforts to deepen financial ties between Hong Kong and the Mainland. The “Three Connections, Three Facilitations” arrangements introduced in 2024, alongside a new suite of six measures unveiled earlier this year, have culminated in significant policy breakthroughs. Among these initiatives was the introduction of the RMB100 billion HKMA RMB Trade Financing Liquidity Facility, which provides banks with a stable, cost-effective funding source for expanding RMB trade finance services to corporate clients, thereby supporting growth in the real economy. Furthermore, measures have for the first time been implemented to allow onshore bonds held through Northbound Bond Connect – notably those issued by the Ministry of Finance and policy banks – to be utilised as eligible collateral for the HKMA’s RMB Liquidity Facility, OTC Clearing Hong Kong Limited and the offshore RMB bond repo business. This has enhanced the appeal of onshore bond holdings to offshore investors, stimulating greater global participation in the onshore bond market. Major progress was also made to upgrade Wealth Management Connect (WMC) to WMC 2.0 last year to provide a wider range of products, greater flexibility in sales and marketing, and an expanded individual investor quota. These measures collectively reinforce Hong Kong’s stature as the global offshore RMB business hub and affirm our pivotal role as a gateway linking the Mainland with the rest of the world.
